Gold  and  Other Minor Elements  Associated 
with  the  Hot Springs  and  Geysers  of 
Yellowstone  National  Park,  Wyoming, 
Supplemented with  Data from 
Steamboat Springs,  Nevada 

U.S.  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  BULLETIN  2001 

AVAILABILITY OF BOOKS AND MAPS OF THE U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY 

Instructions on ordering publications of the U.S. Geological Survey, along with the last offerings, are given in the current-year 
issues  of the  monthly  catalog  "New  Publications  of the  U.S.  Geological  Survey."  Prices  of available  U.S.  Geological  Survey 
publications released prior to the current year are listed in the most recent annual "Price and Availability List"  Publications that are 
listed in various U.S. Geological Survey catalogs (see  back inside cover) but not listed in the most recent annual "Price and Availability 
List" are no longer available. 

Prices of reports released to the open files are given in the listing "U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Reports," updated monthly, 

which is for sale in microfiche from  U.S. Geological Survey Book and Open-File Report Sales, Box 25425, Denver, CO 80225. 

Order U.S. Geological Survey publications by mail or over the counter from the offices given below. 

BY MAIL 
Books 

Professional  Papers,  Bulletins,  Water-Supply  Papers, 

Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations, Circulars, pub(cid:173)
lications of general interest (such as leaflets, pamphlets, book(cid:173)
lets),  single copies of periodicals  (Earthquakes  &  Volcanoes, 
Preliminary Determination of Epicenters), and some miscella(cid:173)
neous reports, including some of the foregoing series that have 
gone  out  of print  at  the  Superintendent  of  Documents,  are 
obtainable by mail from 

U.S. Geological Survey, Book and  Open-File Report  Sales 

Box25425 

Denver, CO 80225 

Subscriptions  to  periodicals  (Earthquakes  &  Volcanoes 
and Preliminary Determination of Epicenters) can be obtained 
ONLY from 

Superintendent of Documents 

U.S. Government Printing Office 

Washington, DC 20402 

(Check or money order must be payable to Superintendent 

of Documents.) 

Maps 

For maps ,  address mail orders to 

U.S. Geological Survey,  Map Sales 

Box 25286 

Denver,  CO  80225 

Residents of Alaska may order maps from 

U.S.  Geological Survey, Map  Sales 

101  Twelfth Ave.- Box 12 

Fairbanks, AK 99701 

OVER  THE  COUNTER 
Books 

Books  of the  U.S. Geological Survey are available over 
the counter at the following U.S. Geological  Survey offices, all 
of which are authorized agents  of  the Superintendent of Doc(cid:173)
uments. 

ANCHORAGE, Alaska--4230 University Dr., Rm. 101 
ANCHORAGE, Alaska--605 West 4th Ave., Rm G-84 
DENVER, Colorado--Federal Bldg., Rm. 169, 1961 Stout 
St. 
LAKEWOOD, Colorado-- Federal Center, Bldg. 810 

MENLO PARK, California--Bldg. 3, Rm. 3128, 345 Mid(cid:173)
dlefield Rd. 
RESTON, Virginia--National Center,  Rm.  1C402, 12201 
Sunrise Valley Dr. 
SALT LAKE CITY, Utah--Federal Bldg., Rm. 8105, 125 
South State St. 
SAN FRANCISCO, California--Customhouse, Rm. 504, 
555 Battery St. 
SPOKANE,  Washington--U.S.  Courthouse,  Rm.  678, 
West 920 Riverside Ave. 
WASHINGTON,  D.C.--U.S.  Department of the  Interior 
Bldg., Rm. 2650, 1849 C St., NW. 

Maps 

Maps  may  be  purchased  over  the  counter  at  the  U.S. 
Geological Survey offices where books are sold (all addresses 
in above list) and at the following Geological Survey offices: 

ROLLA,  Missouri--1400 Independence Rd. 

FAIRBANKS,  Alaska--New  Federal  Building,  101 
Twelfth Ave. 

Gold  and  Other Minor Elements  Associated 
with the  Hot Springs  and  Geysers  of 
Yellowstone  National  Park,  Wyoming, 
Supplemented  with  Data from 
Steamboat Springs,  Nevada 

By  DONALD  E.  WHITE,  CHRIS  HEROPOULOS,  and 
R.O.  FOURNIER 

U.S.  GEOLOGICAL SURVEY  BULLETIN  2001 

U.S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR 
MANUEL  LUJAN,  JR.,  Secretary 

U.S.  GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY 
Dallas  L.  Peck,  Director 

Any  use  of trade,  product,  or firm  names 
in  this  publication  is  for  descriptive  purposes  only 
and  does  not  imply endorsement by  the  U.S.  Government 

Text and  illustrations  edited  by  George  A.  Havach 

UNITED  STATES  GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE,  WASHINGTON  :  1992 

For  sale  by the 
Books  and  Open-File  Reports  Section 
U.S.  Geological  Survey 
Federal  Center,  Box  25425 
Denver,  CO  80225 

Library  of Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data 

White,  Donald  Edward,  1914-

Gold and other minor elements associated  with the hot springs and  geysers 

of Yellowstone  National  Park,  Wyoming, supplemented  with data  from 
Steamboat  Springs,  Nevada I by  Donald  E.  White,  Chris  Heropoulos, and 
R.O.  Fournier. 

p. 

em.  -

(U.S.  Geological  Survey bulletin ;  2001) 

Includes bibliographical  references. 
1. Gold ores-Yellowstone National  park.  2.  Gold ores-Nevada(cid:173)

Washoe County.  3.  Hydrothermal deposits-Yellowstone National  Park. 
4.  Hydrothermal  deposits-Nevada-Washoe County.  I.  Heropoulos,  Chris. 
II.  Fournier,  R.O.,  Ill. Title.  IV.  Title:  Steamboat  Springs,  Nevada.  V.  Series. 
QE75B9  no.  2001 
(QE390.2.G65) 
557.3  s-dc20 
[553.4 11 10978752] 

91-29371 
CIP 

CONTENTS 

Abstract  1 
Introduction  1 
Comparison of analytical methods for gold  2 
Diagenesis of the hydrothermal silica minerals  2 
Gold and associated elements deposited from  hot-spring systems at Yellowstone 

National Park  4 

Opaline hot-spring sinter  S 
Chalcedonic sinter deposits  7 
Gold and associated elements in miscellaneous spring deposits  7 
Gold and associated elements in miscellaneous materials collected at shallow 

depths  8 

Gold and associated elements in hydrothermal eruption craters  8 
Gold and associated  elements in core from  drill holes Y-12 and Y-13, 

Norris and Lower Geyser Basins, Yellowstone National Park  9 

Gold in samples from  Steamboat Springs, Nevada  10 

Gold in material precipitated from  hot springs  10 
Gold and associated elements deposited in three drill holes at Steamboat 

Springs, Nevada  11 

Conclusions, interpretations, and speculations  13 
References cited  18 

FIGURES 

1. 

Index map of Yellowstone National Park, Wyo.,  showing locations of analyzed 
samples by thermal area  3 

2.  Plot of solubilities of common silica minerals in water as a function of 

temperature  S 

3.  Geologic sketch map of Steamboat Springs thermal area, Nev.  14 
4.  Plot of antimony versus gold contents in samples from  Yellowstone National 

Park and Steamboat Springs  16 

5.  Plot of arsenic versus gold contents in samples from  Yellowstone National Park 

and Steamboat Springs  17 

6.  Log-log plot of thallium versus gold contents in samples from  Yellowstone 

National Park and Steamboat Springs  18 

TABLES 

1.  Reported Au contents in some hot-spring deposits of Yellowstone National 

Park, Wyoming, and Steamboat Springs, Nevada  4 

2-9.  Contents of gold and associated elements in: 

2.  Opaline sinters of Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming  6 
3.  Chalcedonic sinter of Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming  8 
4.  Miscellaneous spring deposits of Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming  9 
5.  Miscellaneous near-surface materials from  well-established depths, 

Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming  10 

6.  Samples from  hydrothermal eruption craters of Yellowstone National Park, 

Wyoming  11 

7.  Core from  drill holes Y-12 and Y-13, Norris Geyser Basin and Lower 

Geyser Basin, Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming  12 

8.  Samples from  three drill holes, Steamboat Springs, Nevada, for comparison 

with Yellowstone National-Park, Wyoming  13 

9.  Samples from  Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming, that are relatively 

gold rich  15 

Contents 

Ill 

Gold  and  Other  Minor  Elements  Associated  with  the 
Hot Springs  and  Geysers  of Yellowstone  National  Park, 
Wyoming,  Supplemented  with  Data from 
Steamboat  Springs,  Nevada 

By Donald  E.  White,  Chris  Heropoulos,  and R.O.  Fournier 

Abstract 

A  commonly  held  theory  of  the  origin  of  epithermal 
ore  deposits  relates  Au,  Ag,  Hg,  As,  Sb,  Tl,  and  other 
"volatile"  elements to  "fossil"  hot-spring  systems  that trans(cid:173)
ported  and  deposited  these  metallic  elements  close  to  the 
ground  surface  existing  at the  time.  In  the  early  1970's,  an 
emission-spectrographic  method  using short-wavelength  ra(cid:173)
diation  (SWR)  was  developed  for  use  in  the  analysis  of 
these  "volatile"  elements.  This  method  was  applied  to  125 
samples  of  rock  and  hot-spring  chemical  precipitates  from 
Yellowstone  National  Park  and 43  samples from  Steamboat 
Springs,  Nev.  The  results  of  those  analyses  are  presented 
here.  Recently,  other,  more  sensitive  methods  for  the 
analyses  of  gold  and  volatile  elements  have  been  devel(cid:173)
oped  and  (or)  become  less  expensive,  but  these  methods 
generally  have  not  yet  been  applied  to  Yellowstone 
samples. 

A  few  samples  from  Yellowstone  National  Park  and 
Steamboat Springs were analyzed  by neutron-activation  (NA) 
and  SWR  methods,  as  well  as  by  fire  assay.  In  general,  the 
results  from  the SWR  method  agree  more  closely with  those 
from  the fire-assay  than  the  NA  method.  Present findings  re(cid:173)
veal  significant gold  contents  (more  than  0.1  ppm)  in  only a 
few  samples from  Yellowstone,  but the general  principles  re(cid:173)
lating  Yellowstone's  hot-spring  and  geyser  activity  to  gold 
transport  and  deposition  are  of  considerable  interest  as  a 
guide  to  how gold  deposits  may have formed  elsewhere. 

Concentrations of Sb,  As,  Hg,  B,  Tl,  and  Zn  vary widely 
with  respect  to  Au  and  each  other  in  the  Yellowstone  and 
Steamboat Springs  samples.  Although  Au  appears  to  be con(cid:173)
centrated  in  samples  rich  in  Sb  and  As,  high  Sb  or  As  con(cid:173)
tents  do  not  necessarily  require  correspondingly  high  Au 
contents.  Tl  is  10  to  100  times  lower  in  abundance  in  Yel(cid:173)
lowstone  samples  than  in  Steamboat  Springs  samples.  At 
Yellowstone,  however,  the best correlation  of Au  with  SWR(cid:173)
analyzed  metallic elements appears to  be with Tl. 

The distribution  of gold  in  Yellowstone  National  Park  is 
more  restricted  than  at Steamboat Springs,  possibly  because 

Manuscript approved for publication, June 18,  1991. 

of  greater  dilution  by  a  more  abundant  water  supply  at 
Yellowstone. 

INTRODUCTION 

A  commonly  held  theory  of the  origin  of epither(cid:173)

mal  ore  deposits  relates  Au,  Ag,  Hg,  As,  Sb,  and  other 
"volatile"  elements  to  "fossil"  hot-spring  systems  that 
transported  and  deposited  these  metallic  elements  close 
to  the  ground  surface  existing  at  the  time.  A  second 
group  of  epithermal  deposits,  consisting  mainly  of  the 
base  metals  Cu,  Pb,  Zn,  and  Ag,  is  generally  thought  to 
form  at  greater  depth  within  hydrothermal  systems. 
Base-metal deposits are not considered in  this  report,  al(cid:173)
though  zinc  is  reported  here  as  a trace element.  Silver is 
commonly present in  both  groups  and generally becomes 
more  abundant  downward  where  the  base  metals  under(cid:173)
lie "volatile element" deposits. 

Geologists  and  geochemists  familiar  with  low(cid:173)

grade,  dispersed,  epithermal  gold  deposits  have  applied 
various  names  to  them,  including  "bulk minable," "sedi(cid:173)
ment  hosted,"  and  "invisible  gold."  These  types  of  de(cid:173)
posits  became  the  focus  of exploration  programs  in  the 
1960's,  when  the  value  of  gold  increased  dramatically. 
Gold  is  now  routinely  analyzed  at  levels  above  1  part 
per billion  (ppb) by  neutron-activation  (NA),  and  of 1-2 
ppb  by  inductively  coupled  plasma  atomic-emission 
spectroscopic  (ICP-AES),  methods.  In  the  1960's  and 
1970's, however,  these  analytical  techniques  were  either 
very  expensive  (NA  method)  or  unavailable  (ICP-AES 
method),  and  so  the  small  gold  concentrations  in  dis(cid:173)
persed  deposits  were  seldom  detected  by  the  then(cid:173)
prevalent  standard  analytical  methods  (fire  assay  and 
spectrographic).  Therefore,  a  group  of associated  trace 
elements,  generally  more abundant and more  widely  dis(cid:173)
tributed  than  Au,  including  Ag,  Hg,  As,  Sb,  and  Tl,  be(cid:173)
came  useful  indicators  that provide broader  targets  more 
easily identifiable than Au alone. 

Introduction 

In  the  early  1970's,  a  short-wavelength-radiation 
(SWR)  emission-spectrographic  method was  developed  by 
one of us (C.H.) and applied to the analysis of those "vola(cid:173)
tile"  elements that are transported under conditions similar 
to  those  for  gold.  This  method  is  as  much  as  100  times 
more  sensitive  than  conventional  spectrographic  methods. 
Typical  detection  limits  for  conventional  spectrographic 
analyses  have  been  lowered  by the  SWR method,  respec(cid:173)
tively, from  7  to 0.1  ppm for Au, from  700 to  1.0 ppm for 
As,  and  from  300  to  3  ppm  for  Sb.  The  only  element 
closely associated with Au that is not determined more re(cid:173)
liably  by  the  SWR  method  than  by  conventional  spectro(cid:173)
graphic  methods is Ag;  detection  limits  for  Se, Te, and Bi 
are also improved. 

Analytical data were compiled over a  time period of 
about 15 years. Steamboat Springs, Nev., is well known for 
its current deposition of Au, Ag, Hg, and Sb,  but little  has 
been published about the distribution of these elements within 
the  Yellowstone  National  Park  hydrothermal  system.  Al(cid:173)
though present findings reveal significant gold concentrations 
(more  than  0.1  ppm)  in  only  a  few  Yellowstone  samples, 
the general principles relating Yellowstone's hot-spring and 
geyser activity to gold transport and deposition are of great 
interest as a  guide to  how gold deposits  may  have formed 
elsewhere. We realize that many advances have been made 
in techniques for the rapid analysis or' trace amounts of gold 
and related elements since our cooperative effort started in 
the early  1970's, but our results for the broad suite of vola(cid:173)
tile elements found in the hot-spring deposits at Yellowstone 
National  Park  and  Steamboat  Springs  are  still  of interest 
because  the  data  have  general! y  not  been  superseded  by 
newer analyses. 

The background Au contents of fresh  volcanic rocks 
of Yellowstone  National  Park  were  carefully  studied  in 
two  related  reports  by  Gottfried  and  others  (1972)  and 
Tilling and others  (1973),  utilizing NA analysis  in  combi(cid:173)
nation  with  fire  assay  for  radiochemical  separation.  The 
Au  contents  of most  of  Yellowstone's  fresh  rocks  range 
from  0.1  to  60 ppb  and  average 0.5  ppb;  the  Au  contents 
of  Yellowstone's  thermal  waters  range  from  less  than 
0.004  to  0.1  ppb  and  average  about  0.004  ppb  (all  much 
too low for the SWR method). 

We  make  no  effort  to  duplicate  in  this  report  the 
careful  background  study  of  the  gold  contents  of fresh 
rocks  or of water,  as  determined  by Gottfried  and  others 
(1972)  and  Tilling and others  (1973).  Instead,  we concen(cid:173)
trate  on  determining  the  gold  contents  of precipitates  and 
hydrothermally  altered  rocks  within  the  above-described 
analytical limits of the SWR method. 

The  locations  of sampled  thermal  areas  in  Yellow(cid:173)

stone National Park,  mainly  within  the caldera,  are shown 
in  figure  1.  The  locations  of Steamboat  Springs  samples 
were  adequately  described  in  previous  publications 
(Brannock  and  others,  1948;  White,  1968),  except  that 

analytical  data  on  samples  from  drill  holes  GS-2,  GS-5, 
and GS-6 are also reported here. 

Acknowledgments.-We  are  grateful  to  the  National 
Park Service for allowing samples to be collected from  hot 
springs and for the opportunity provided for research drill(cid:173)
ing in the park.  The continuing cooperative efforts of R.A. 
Hutchinson, National Park Service geologist, are especially 
appreciated  In addition to  many other activities, he helped 
in  collecting  samples  from  Dantes  Spring  of the  Sylvan 
Group  of western  Gibbon  Geyser  Basin,  and  from  Beryl 
Spring in Gibbon Canyon. 

COMPARISON  OF ANALYTICAL  METHODS 
FOR  GOLD 

A few  samples from  Steamboat Springs and Yellow(cid:173)
stone National Park were analyzed by NA and SWR meth(cid:173)
ods,  as  well  as by fire  assay  (table  1).  Au  contents  below 
0.1  ppm  are  reported  by  the  SWR  method  as  <0.1  (later 
analyses)  or <0.2 ppm  (earlier analyses).  Only a  few  sam(cid:173)
ples  of  the  material  analyzed  by  different  methods  were 
collected  at the  same  time  and  place;  most  samples  were 
from  common  localities  but  were  collected  on  different 
dates. 

In  general,  the  results  from  the  SWR  method  agree 
more  closely  with  those  from  the  fire-assay  than  the  NA 
method.  The NA results  for  two  samples  from  Steamboat 
Springs  (W-50  and  W-91)  are  considerably  higher  than 
those obtained by  the other two  methods.  In contrast,  NA 
gives  much  lower  values  than  the  other  two  methods  for 
the  samples  from  Beryl  Spring  in  Yellowstone  National 
Park (fig.  1). However, the samples from  Beryl Spring that 
were  analyzed  by  the NA  method  were  collected at a  dif(cid:173)
ferent  date  and  place  than  the  samples  analyzed  by  the 
SWR and frre-assay  methods. 

DIAGENESIS  OF THE 
HYDROTHERMAL  SILICA  MINERALS 

Because of the  close affinity  of gold  with  silica in 

the  veins  of many  deposits,  the  diagenesis  of hydrother(cid:173)
mal  silica is  considered here before  the  metallic-element 
analyses  are  discussed.  By  definition,  sinter  (normally, 
amorphous  opal)  forms  by  direct  chemical  precipitation 
of Si02 from  hot water discharging at the surface.  As  the 
hot water cools, the solubility of Si02 decreases, and the 
solution  becomes  supersaturated,  first  with  respect  to 
quartz  and  then  to  more  soluble  silica  species  (fig.  2). 
The  rates  of  polymerization  of  dissolved  silica  and 
growth of crystalline silica phases decrease drastically as 
the  temperature  declines  (White  and  others,  1956; 
Fournier,  1973,  1985;  Rimstidt  and  Barnes,  1980).  Hot 

2 

Gold and Other Minor  Elements Associated with the Hot Springs and Geysers of Yellowstone  National  Park, Wyoming 

