U.S.  Department  of  the  Interior 

Geological  Survey

HEAT FLOW FROM THE WESTERN ARM OF THE BLACK ROCK DESERT, NEVADA

by

C.  W.  Mase  and  J.  H.  Sass

U.S.  Geological  Survey  Open-File  Report  80-1238

1980

This  report  is  preliminary  and  has  not  been  reviewed  for  conformity 

with  U.S.  Geological  Survey  editorial  standards  and  stratigraphic  nomenclature

Abstract

Heat-flow  values  for  12  new  sites  in  the  western  Black  Rock  Desert 

range  from  56  mWm  2  to  over  500  mWm  2  near  Double  Hot  Springs.  Combining 

these  results  with  over  20  values  obtained  by  Sass  and  others  (1979)  yields  a 

mean  heat  flow  of  76  ±  4  mWm  2  outside  of  the  areas  of  anomalous  heat  flow 

associated  with  thermal  spring  systems.  This  mean  is  significantly  lower  than 

that  characteristic  of  the  Battle  Mountain  heat-flow  high  (>125  mWm" 2 )  and  is 

of  doubtful  regional  significance  because  of 

the  observed  hydrothermal 

phenomena  and  because  some  of  the  recharge  for  the  systems  may  originate 

within 

the  basin.  The 

lack  of  recent  volcanism 

in  the  region  and  the 

apparently  normal  Basin  and  Range  heat  flow  suggests 

that  geothermal 

systems  are  stable  stationary  phases  supported  by  high  regional  heat  flow 

with  the  fluid  flow  governed  by  the  configuration  of  fractures  and  permeable 

formations  and  forced  by  a 

regional  piezometric  gradient  controlled  by 

topography  and  precipitation.

The  complexity  of  the  heat-flow  pattern  probably  arises  from  hydro- 

thermal  circulation  supporting  the  numerous  hot  springs 

throughout  the 

region.  Upward  groundwater  flow  from  depths  of  from  2  to  6  km  can  maintain 

the  temperatures  that  are  observed  for  hot  springs  in  the  western  Black  Rock 

Desert.  Microearthquake  activity  indicates  active  fracturing  to  the  required 

depths  of  circulation.  The  net  anomalous  heat  discharge  from  the  hot  spring 

systems  is  estimated  at  34  MW  based  on  convective  and  conductive  heat  loss. 

Steady-state  heat  transfer  by  moving  groundwater  in  a  normal  Basin  and 

Range  heat-flow  environment  can  easily  provide  the  observed  power  loss.

-  2  -

INTRODUCTION

Hydrothermal  activity  occurs  at  many  locations  along  the  margins  of  the 

Black  Rock  Desert  in  northern  Nevada  (Waring,  1965;  Renner  and  others, 

1975;  Brook  and  others,  1979).  The  youngest  volcanism  in  the  region  is 

basaltic  and  has  been  dated  at  23  m.y.  (Grose  and  Sperandio,  1978),  too  old 

to  represent  heat  sources  for  the  modern  hydrothermal  activity.  On  the  basis 

of  high  thermal  gradients  in  wells,  high  heat  flow  in  contiguous  regions  and 

the  observed  hydrothermal  activity,  Sass  and  others 

(1979,  1980)  and 

Lachenbruch  and  Sass  (1977,  1978)  have  included  the  Black  Rock  Desert 

within  the  Battle  Mountain  heat-flow  high  (BMH,  Figure  1).  This  suggests 

that  geothermal  systems  within  the  Black  Rock  Desert  may  be  the  result  of 

deep  circulation  of  groundwater,  storage,  and  heating  within  a  reservoir  due 

to  a  high  regional  heat  flow  with  subsequent  discharge  to  the  surface  through 

permeable  conduits  within  fault  zones.

The  present  work  was  undertaken  to  provide  additional  heat-flow  infor(cid:173) 

mation  for  a  geothermal  resource  assessment  of  the  western  arm  of  the  Black 

Rock  Desert.  The  assessment  is  primarily  the  responsibility  of  the  Water 

Resources  Division  (WRD)  of  the  U.S.  Geological  Survey  and  the  Bureau  of 

Land  Management  (BLM).  All  of  the  new  data  discussed  herein  were  obtained 

from  holes  sited  and  drilled  by  WRD  (Alan  H.  Welch,  personal  communication, 

1980;  Schaefer  and  others,  1980).  We  have  combined  the  data  from  12  new 

heat-flow  sites  (Figure  2)  with  the  results  of  Sass  and  others  (1979)  in  an 

attempt  to  determine  the  thermal  structure  of  the  western  Black  Rock  Desert, 

to  delineate  the  extent  of  subsurface  thermal  features  and  to  ascertain  the 

nature  and  origins  of  the  thermal  fluids  and  heat  sources.

-  3  -

IOOC
T

Figure  1.  Generalized map of heat flow and physiographic provinces  in

the western U.S.  (after Lachenbruch and Sass,  1978;  Lachenbruch,  1978) 
Abbreviations  are BMH,  Battle Mountain High;  SRP,  Snake River Plain; 
IB,  Idaho Batholith;  Y,  Yellowstone;  RGR,  Rio Grande  Rift;  EL,  Eureka 
Low;  LV,  Long Valley.  Arrow indicates present study area.

-  4  -

The  following  symbols  and  units  are  used  in  the  remainder  of  this 

report:

T, 

temperature,  °C

K, 

thermal  conductivity,  W  m" l jC l ;  1  HCU  (meal  cm" 1 s" 1 °C" 1 )  =

.418  W  m" 1  K" 1

z, 

depth,  m  positive  downwards 

v  ,  vertical  (seepage)  velocity  m  s  l  or  mm  y  1  or  volume  flux  of  water

2
F, 

vertical  temperature  gradient,  °C  km  *  or  K  km" 1 

q, 

vertical  conductive  heat  flow,  mWm  2  or  kW  km  2 , 

or  HFU  (10~ 6  cal  cm" 1  s" 1 ): 

1  HFU  =  41.8  mW  m~2

Acknowledgments.  The  comments  of  Art  Lachenbruch  and  Alien  Welch 

were  particularly  helpful  in  the  development  of  this  paper.  We  thank  Pete 

Galanis  for  preparation  of  the  geologic  sketch  map  used  in  Figures  2,  4,  and 

5.

-  5  -

GEOLOGIC  SETTING

The  western  arm  of  the  Black  Rock  Desert  occupies  a  position  near  the 

western  margin  of  the  Basin  and  Range  physiographic  province.  The  region 

is  characterized  by  roughly  parallel  mountain  ranges  and  basins  having  a 

north-northeast  trend.  The  region 

is  one  of  currently  active  tectonism 

marked  by  abundant  late  Pleistocene  and  Holocene  faults.  The  major  hot 

springs  in  the  area,  Black  Rock  Point,  Double,  Fly  Range,  Gerlach,  Mud  and 

Trego,  occur  on  or  very  near  faults  with  Quaternary  displacements.  Surficial 

tension  cracks  (interpreted  as  tectonic  in  origin,  Grose,  1978),  fault  patterns 

and  seismic 

focal  mechanisms 

indicate  active 

tectonic  spreading  along  a 

WNW-ESE  axis  in  the  western  Black  Rock  Desert  region  (Kumamoto,  1978). 

This  pattern 

is  consistent  with  a  relatively  uniform  WNW-ESE  extension 

direction  throughout  northern  Nevada  (Zoback  and  Thompson,  1978).  The 

geologic  setting  of  the  western  Black  Rock  Desert  is  summarized  in  Figure  2. 

The  geologic 

information 

in 

the  figure 

is  generalized 

from  Grose  and 

Sperandio  (1978),  Bonham  (1969),  and  Wilden  (1964).

The  ranges  surrounding  the  western  Black  Rock  Desert  are  composed 

largely  of  Cretaceous  granodiorite,  Permo-Triassic  meta-volcanic  and  meta- 

sedimentary  rocks  and  late  Oligocene  -  early  Miocene  rhyolitic,  andesitic,  and 

basaltic  sequences.  Valley  fill  includes  late  Tertiary  and  Quaternary  fluviatile 

and 

lacustrine 

sediments 

that  were  deposited  concurrently  with  normal 

faulting.

-  6  -

119°30'

119°00'

Nfitack  Rock  Point

Rock  Fault

Oo|  Quaternary  playa,  lake,  alluvial  fan,  and 

dune  deposits

Pre-Quaternary  volcanic  rocks  and  meta- 

morphic  rocks

r}^  Granodiorite  (foliated  southwest  of  Gerlach) 

Contact

    Fault

Hot  Springs

Figure 2.  Geologic sketch map of the western Black Rock Desert and 

adjoining ranges.  Geology and faults  generalized from Grose 
and Sperandio  (1978),  Bonham (1969),  and Wilden  (1964). 
Small dots  indicate control from Sass  and others  (1979).

-  7  -

GEOTHERMAL GRADIENT AND HEAT-FLOW DATA

The  most  recent  temperature-depth  profiles  for  12  new  heat-flow  sites  in 

the  southern  Black  Rock  Desert  are  shown  in  Figure  3.  Based  on  thermal 

considerations,  Lachenbruch  and  others  (1976)  have  suggested  the  thermal 

gradient  profiles  for  areas  within  or  near  hydrothermal  systems  be  divided  up 

into 

three  distinct  groups. 

The 

three  groups  are  considered 

to  be 

characteristic  of  regions  with  hydrologic  recharge  (Group  I),  regions  with 

conductive  regimes  to  substantial  depths  (Group  II)  and  regions  of  hydrologic 

discharge  (Group  III).  Group  I  boreholes  (BR06  through  BR11,  Figure  3) 

yield  significantly  low  gradients  (53  to  85  °C  km' 1  compared  to  an  expected 

gradient  of  ~120  °C  km  1 

for 

the  playa 

if 

the  heat 

flow 

is 

indeed 

characteristic  of  the  BMH)  suggesting  that  heat  from  below  is  being  absorbed 

by  downward  movement  of  water,  a  condition  characteristic  of  hydrologic 

recharge.  The  upper  parts  of  the  temperature  profiles  from  these  boreholes 

show  the  influence  of  upward  water  movement  probably  due  to  discharge  from 

a  shallow  subsystem  within  the  playa  sediments.  Group  II  boreholes  (BR01 

and  BR04,  Figure  3)  yield  a  gradient  and  heat  flow  comparable 

to  the 

hydrologically  undisturbed  regional  value  (^125  mWm  2 ),  suggesting  that  heat 

transfer  is  accomplished  primarily  by  conduction.  Group  III  boreholes  (BR02, 

BROS,  BR05,  and  BR12,  Figure  3)  have  thermal  gradients  that  are  generally 

quite  large  and  variable  with  depth,  a  characteristic  influence  of  upward 

and/or 

lateral  convection  of 

thermal  fluids 

through  fracture  zones  or 

vertically  permeable 

formations. 

The  high-frequency  excursions 

in 

the 

temperature  profiles  for  boreholes  BRIO  and  BR11  are  attributed  to  the 

presence  of  gas  bubbles  observed  streaming 

from 

the  borehole  during 

logging.

-  8  -

